README.md, before:

# Insurance-claims-dashboard
A data analytics project built using Power BI to analyze 10,000+ insurance records, providing insights into claim status, premium and coverage distribution, customer demographics, age-based claim trends, and active vs inactive policies through interactive visualizations.
## 🏢 Project Overview
This project focuses on analyzing insurance policy and claims data using **Power BI** to derive meaningful business insights.  
The interactive dashboard helps understand claim trends, premium and coverage distribution, customer demographics, and policy activity status, enabling data-driven decision-making for insurance companies.

---

## 🎯 Project Objectives
- Analyze the distribution of insurance claims by status (Rejected, Settled, Pending)
- Evaluate premium amounts across different policy types
- Study claim amount trends across various age groups
- Track active vs inactive insurance policies
- Understand customer distribution based on gender
- Provide interactive filtering for policy, claim, and customer-level analysis

---

## 🛠 Tools & Technologies Used
- **Power BI** – Data modeling & visualization  
- **Excel / CSV Dataset** – Data source  
- **DAX** – Measures and calculated fields  
- **Data Cleaning & Transformation**

---

## 📂 Dataset Description
The dataset contains **10,000+ insurance records** with the following key attributes:
- Policy and customer identifiers
- Customer demographics (gender, age)
- Policy details (type, premium, coverage)
- Claim details (amount, date, status)

The dataset is structured to simulate real-world insurance operations.

---

## 🧠 Data Preparation & Modeling
- Converted date fields into proper date formats
- Created **Age Groups** (Young Adult, Adult, Elder)
- Handled missing claim dates for rejected claims
- Built relationships between policy, customer, and claims data
- Created DAX measures for KPIs such as:
  - Total Premium Amount
  - Total Coverage Amount
  - Total Claim Amount
  - Count of Active and Inactive Policies

---

## 📊 Dashboard Features
- **KPI Cards** displaying total premium, coverage, and claim amounts
- **Claim Status Analysis** (Rejected, Settled, Pending)
- **Premium Amount by Policy Type**
- **Claim Amount by Age Group**
- **Active vs Inactive Policies**
- **Gender-based Customer Distribution**
- Interactive **slicers** for Policy Number, Claim Number, and Customer ID

---

## 📷 Dashboard Preview
<img width="1505" height="689" alt="Dashboard " src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39ad5745-2f59-4b99-a74c-c2c9d2fbfcf7" />

---

## 📌 Key Insights
- Travel insurance generates the highest premium revenue
- Adult age group contributes the highest claim amount
- Claim rejection rate is higher compared to settled claims
- Active policies slightly outnumber inactive policies
- Male and female customer distribution is nearly balanced

---

## 🚀 How to Use This Project
1. Download the `.pbix` file from the **Dashboard** folder
2. Open it using **Power BI Desktop**
3. Load the dataset - **InsuranceData** if required
4. Explore insights using interactive filters and visuals

---

## 👩‍💻 Author
**Puja Dhokchaule**  
Aspiring Data Analyst 

---

## ⭐ Acknowledgment
This project was created as part of a data analytics learning journey to build a strong portfolio and gain hands-on experience with real-world datasets.

Commit message:

README.md
Added problem statement and clarified project overview.

README.md, after:

# Insurance-claims-dashboard
## ❓ Problem Statement
Insurance companies handle large volumes of policy and claims data, making it difficult to track claim performance, customer behavior, and policy effectiveness using raw data alone.  
The absence of centralized and interactive reporting limits timely decision-making and insight generation.

The objective of this project is to build an interactive Power BI dashboard that analyzes insurance claims and policy data to:
- Monitor claim status and trends
- Evaluate premium and coverage distribution
- Understand customer demographics and age-based claim behavior
- Track active and inactive policies

This dashboard enables stakeholders to make informed, data-driven decisions efficiently.



## 🏢 Project Overview
This project focuses on analyzing insurance policy and claims data using **Power BI** to derive meaningful business insights.  
The interactive dashboard helps understand claim trends, premium and coverage distribution, customer demographics, and policy activity status, enabling data-driven decision-making for insurance companies.

---

## 🎯 Project Objectives
- Analyze the distribution of insurance claims by status (Rejected, Settled, Pending)
- Evaluate premium amounts across different policy types
- Study claim amount trends across various age groups
- Track active vs inactive insurance policies
- Understand customer distribution based on gender
- Provide interactive filtering for policy, claim, and customer-level analysis

---

## 🛠 Tools & Technologies Used
- **Power BI** – Data modeling & visualization  
- **Excel / CSV Dataset** – Data source  
- **DAX** – Measures and calculated fields  
- **Data Cleaning & Transformation**

---

## 📂 Dataset Description
The dataset contains **10,000+ insurance records** with the following key attributes:
- Policy and customer identifiers
- Customer demographics (gender, age)
- Policy details (type, premium, coverage)
- Claim details (amount, date, status)

The dataset is structured to simulate real-world insurance operations.

---

## 🧠 Data Preparation & Modeling
- Converted date fields into proper date formats
- Created **Age Groups** (Young Adult, Adult, Elder)
- Handled missing claim dates for rejected claims
- Built relationships between policy, customer, and claims data
- Created DAX measures for KPIs such as:
  - Total Premium Amount
  - Total Coverage Amount
  - Total Claim Amount
  - Count of Active and Inactive Policies

---

## 📊 Dashboard Features
- **KPI Cards** displaying total premium, coverage, and claim amounts
- **Claim Status Analysis** (Rejected, Settled, Pending)
- **Premium Amount by Policy Type**
- **Claim Amount by Age Group**
- **Active vs Inactive Policies**
- **Gender-based Customer Distribution**
- Interactive **slicers** for Policy Number, Claim Number, and Customer ID

---

## 📷 Dashboard Preview
<img width="1505" height="689" alt="Dashboard " src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39ad5745-2f59-4b99-a74c-c2c9d2fbfcf7" />

---

## 📌 Key Insights
- Travel insurance generates the highest premium revenue
- Adult age group contributes the highest claim amount
- Claim rejection rate is higher compared to settled claims
- Active policies slightly outnumber inactive policies
- Male and female customer distribution is nearly balanced

---

## 🚀 How to Use This Project
1. Download the `.pbix` file from the **Dashboard** folder
2. Open it using **Power BI Desktop**
3. Load the dataset - **InsuranceData** if required
4. Explore insights using interactive filters and visuals

---

## 👩‍💻 Author
**Puja Dhokchaule**  
Aspiring Data Analyst 

---

## ⭐ Acknowledgment
This project was created as part of a data analytics learning journey to build a strong portfolio and gain hands-on experience with real-world datasets.
